1. Data Acquisition and Preparation
To construct the training data for building segmentation, the pipeline addresses two
primary tasks: downloading OpenStreetMap (OSM) files and obtaining satellite images
from Sentinel-2. The process starts with using the download_sentinel_band function,
which downloads the sentinel files from "https://openeocloud.vito.be/openeo/1.0.0".
Two Sentinel-2 files are downloaded: one containing a single band ("B04") and another
with multiple bands ("B04", "B03", "B02", "B08"). This separation was necessary because
plotting a single band image directly from the multi-band data was not possible.
The reproject_sentinel_to_utm function then reprojects the Sentinel-2 images to the
UTM (Universal Transverse Mercator) coordinate system, ensuring alignment with the
OSM data. It was also necessary to look up the specific utm zone for each city.
For OSM data, the process_osm_data function manages the retrieval and processing. It
involves downloading OSM files for the cities, extracting the building data, and
reprojecting it to match the Sentinel-2 CRS. The resulting data is then plotted and saved
as high-definition JPEG images. This was neccesary for creatig the patches in the next
steps, as creating patches and tensor from geoJson file or osm.pbf files have proven to
be difficult.
RGB Bands OSM
Overlay of RGB and OSM Single Band
IRB Bands
1.2 Data Preparation
This task has proven to be the most challenging due to the differing tensor shapes,
particularly the target labels. The primary difficulty was splitting the tensor of target
labels and correctly matching them with the input tensors. To address this, I adopted an
alternative approach, which, although requiring more storage and time, effectively
solves the problem. This approach involves slicing the source files into smaller patches
and saving them. Consequently, for each city, I generated several outputs: the JPEG of
the entire city, JPEG files for each patch, the Sentinel file of the entire city, and Sentinel
files for each patch. This method allowed proper alignment of the patches for the next
training task.
After creating the patches, I proceeded to create tensors for each JPEG and Sentinel
patch file using the create_tensors_from_patches function. This function iterates
through all the .nc and .jpg files, converting each patch into a NumPy array. These arrays
are then appended and converted into tensors using TensorFlow's convert_to_tensor
function. To ensure the tensors have the correct shape, the function is used as follows:
input_tensor = tf.convert_to_tensor(np.transpose(np.array(sentinel_patches), (0, 2, 3,
1)), dtype=tf.float32)
target_tensor = tf.convert_to_tensor(np.array(jpeg_patches), dtype=tf.float32)
Here, np.transpose is used to reorder the dimensions of the NumPy array containing
Sentinel patches. The original array has dimensions [N, C, H, W]. By transposing the
array to [N, H, W, C], it is matched to the required format of Tensorflow, where the
channel dimension is placed last. I also tried keeping the original array but this has
given me some mistakes and missalignement, especially when I tried to visualize it. For
the target tensor, the convert_to_tensor function directly converts the NumPy array to a
tensor with dimensions [N, H, W], as it does not include a channel dimension.
When I initially loaded the JPEG patches as black and white images, a significant
amount of building information was lost. To address this, I used all colors for reading the
patches. However, this approach failed during model training because the model
couldn't distinguish which pixels represented buildings. Therefore, I manually
transformed the target tensors into binary masks, this allowed me to adjust the
threshhold when a pixel value is classified as a building or not. After some adjustment I
settled on a threshhold of 0.1. Increasing the threshhold will include more pixels as
buildings, but this can also lead to classyfing to many pixels wrongfully as buildings.
What the function exactly does it to create binary mask using the specified threshold.
The tf.cast function is employed to convert the mask into a binary format, where pixels
with values greater than the threshold are set to 1 (indicating buildings), and those with
values below or equal to the threshold are set to 0 (indicating non-building areas).
The final step involved addressing patches that, after transformation, were completely
pitch black or white. To tackle this, I implemented a filter that removes masks with
average values below 0.01 or above 0.99, ensuring only meaningful patches are retained
for training.
The dataset was then split to ensure proper training, validation, and testing. Berlin was
designated as the test set, while the remaining cities were combined for training and
validation. The train_test_split function from the sklearn library was used to divide the
combined dataset, reserving 20% of the data for validation.
1.3 Modeling and Tuning
Using the TensorFlow Keras library, I developed the initial baseline model for building
segmentation, leveraging four padded CNN layers. The first three layers utilized 3x3
kernels with a single stride, increasing the number of channels from 32 to 64, and then
to 128. The final layer used a 1x1 kernel to produce a single output channel indicating
the presence of a building. After a bit of googling, I selected binary crossentropy as the
loss function due to its popularity for CNN-based binary classification tasks.
Next, I conducted hyperparameter tuning to optimize the model's performance. I
created a function to build the model with adjustable L2 regularization and learning
rates. I defined a grid of hyperparameters
(l2_regs = [0.001, 0.01, 0.1] and learning_rates = [0.0001, 0.001, 0.01])
and trained multiple models with different combinations of these parameters. The
model training incorporated early stopping to avoid overfitting, and I evaluated each
model's validation accuracy to identify the best-performing configuration.
To further enhance the segmentation capabilities, I implemented a U-Net model, which
is known for efficacy in image segmentation. The U-Net architecture included an
encoder with convolutional and max-pooling layers to capture context, a bridge with a
bottleneck layer, and a decoder with upsampling. This model was also trained with early
stopping and evaluated on the test set.
Results:
In the normal training setup, the model achieved a test accuracy 0.6350135207176208,
indicating moderate performance in distinguishing building pixels. When
hyperparameter tuning was introduced, the best configuration (L2 regularization of 0.1
and learning rate of 0.0001) improved the test accuracy to 0.6646453142166138,
showing the importance of tuning to enhance model performance. The U-Net model,
known for its effectiveness in segmentation tasks, was also evaluated and achieved a
test accuracy of 0.6350135207176208. These results demonstrate that while the basic
CNN architecture with hyperparameter tuning offers some improvements, advanced
architectures like U-Net can provide comparable performance.
Plots for normal model
Plots for U-Net model
1.4 Data Augmentation
To enhance model quality, I employed data augmentation techniques such as shear,
rotation, and reflection. Initially, I attempted to use the ImageDataGenerator from the
TensorFlow Keras library. However, due to the shape of the target tensor, I always got
errors because of invalid tensor shape. Consequently, I implemented a more sloppy
solution by applying augmentations during the patch creation phase. The functon
create_and_save_patches in the data_augmentation.ipynb file is very similar to the
same function in the (…) function, with the addition that next to the normal patches the
augmented patches are created and saved. Given the substantial number of patches, I
limited the augmentations to shearing, rotation, and reflection to manage storage and
computational constraints. The augmented data was used in the same machine
learning pipeline as the original data, maintaining the same models.
The results of the augmentation experiments were rather interesting and should be
taken with a grain of salt due to my unorthodox implementation of data augmentation:
all augments Test accuracy: 0.6174458265304565
only reflection Test accuracy: 0.6350167393684387
only Rotation Test accuracy: 0.5882859230041504
only Shear Test accuracy: 0.6114670038223267
normal Test accuracy: 0.6350135207176208
normal + reflection Test accuracy: 0.6350151300430298
These findings reveal that simply adding more data through augmentation does not
automatically improve results. Reflection alone yielded the highest test accuracy,
suggesting it increases the diversity of building orientations in the training data without
altering the inherent structure too drastically. Conversely, rotation resulted in the lowest
test accuracy, possibly due to introducing excessive variability that the model struggles
to generalize.
The combined augmentations did not outperform the individual augmentations,
indicating potential redundancy or conflicting transformations when used together. This
underscores the importance of carefully selecting augmentation techniques to enhance
model performance.
